# centromere_seeker
bash script to search for centromeric repeat patterns in long sequence data, using several current tools (trf and R)

centromere_seeker
version 2.0 -- 161121

this script looks for long repeats in pacbio data with trf
and plots them visually to isolate potential centromeric
repeats

must have both tandem repeat finder (trf, https://tandem.bu.edu/trf/trf.html)
and R (https://www.r-project.org/) installed

centromere seeker has 2 stages and 2 outputs

stage 1 - determines underlying repeat patterns in the sequencing data
			this stage runs trf, then converts that data to csv and plots
			the resulting data in R. the R plot output is "cent_seek_graph.pdf"
			on screen output will inform you when this has been created, and
			once it has, you should assess it for patterns that are consistent
			with a broadly present centromere-sized repeat (see 
			example_cent_seek_graph.pdf). if you observe a pattern input the
			centromere size that pattern indicates into the terminal prompt to
			enter stage 2

stage 2 - the program now switches and gathers the sequence data with pattern
			lengths that match your hypotesized centromere size (n, 2n, and 4n)
			there are two outputs:

			centromere_pattern_length_matches.fasta	- includes the n-length 
														pattern that trf found

			centromere_full_length_matches.fasta	- includes the full match
														that trf found, which 
														may include slight 
														variations in the 
														pattern

with these fasta outputs, use your favorite alignment program (e.g. AliView)
to determine if there is a large and common connection across these patterns. 
if so, that repeat may be very common in the genome of interest which may be 
indicative of a centromeric repeat.

explainer - 
analyzing the graph to determine centromere length:
the centromeric repeat should be one of the longest and most prevalent (by 
content) in the genome. given this, and the fact that centromeric repeats are 
often long, trf should find shortest iteration of the repeat (for example, 
53bp) in repeats of up to 40 or 50-fold. this creates a noticable peak in the
plot generated by cent_seeker. that peak is then repeated at 2*53, 3*53, and so
on. these peaks are exampls of trf estimating back-to-back 53bp repeats as one 
long 106bp repeat (same for 3*53 = 159bp). this is the pattern to look for in
the graph output.


cent_seeker_v2.0.sh
implemented
	-the ability to pass flags into the program
	-broke the program into parts that can be run separately